Get your voice level. Okay, I'll give you a level. If we shadows have offended,
think that this and all is mended, that you have but slumbered here while these
visions did appear. And this week, an idle theme, no more yielding but a dream,
gentles. Do not reprehend. If you pardon, I will mend. And as I am an honest
puck, if I have unearned luck, not escaping the serpent's tongue, I will make
amends there long. Else the puck a liar call, and so goodnight unto you all.
Give me your hand if we be friends, and Robin shall restore amends. Yeah, I'm
getting ready. We can go. Okay. Yeah, the tape is rolling, so we're going to go
ahead now. Mr. Paul, you've written of how you grew up with science fiction,
reading The Pulse, organizing clubs, editing fanzines, and so forth. Could you
recall what it was that attracted you to science fiction so completely at such
an early age? Well, I think it was basically the adventure, the kind of science
fiction that was being published around 1930, when I first got in touch with it,
when I first discovered that it existed, was mostly space opera and gimmick
stories and the stories about exciting, adventurous exploits all over the
galaxy. And that was in the middle of the Great Depression, and science fiction
looked an awful lot better to me than the real world that I could see.
Okay, I believe your first story was published around 1937. Is that correct,
around that time? The first thing I had published was a poem. It was an amazing
story. I wrote it in 1935, and it was accepted in 1936, and published in 1937,
and paid for in 1938. So somewhere in there I became a professional writer. The
first story, I think, was probably in 1938. It was a collaboration with another
writer, and it appeared in Astounding, the magazine that's now called Analog.
Could you explain just a little bit about what the Futurians were, and your part
in the organization? Well, science fiction has some special traits, and one of
them is that its readers heard together as much as they can. They formed fan
clubs and associations and correspondence groups and so on. And in New York
City, there were quite a few science fiction fans, and about 25 or 30, most of
whom wanted to be writers, formed a club called the Futurians. There were people
like Cyril Karnblist and Isaac Asimov and Damon Knight and myself and quite a
few others. Don Walheim, who's now the head of Daw Books as an editor, and, you
know, batches of others who really desperately wanted to write science fiction
or edit science fiction or something like that. Quite a few of them acted out
their childhood fantasies and did it. And I'm not quite sure why the Futurians
produced more science fiction writers than most of the other clubs. It probably
has something to do with size. New York had a bigger pool of talent to draw
from. The Los Angeles group also produced quite a few, including Ray Bradbury
and Larry Niven and several others. Did you help each other in your writing? Was
it sort of a brotherhood kind of thing where you aided each other? It was partly
help and partly one-upmanship and putting each other down. We did discuss each
other's work a lot, and I guess in the process of criticizing it, there was a
lot of help given. I think the biggest factor that made it easier for a lot of
us to go on with writing was just the knowledge that other people were doing it,
and also the fact that we collaborated a lot. We remedied each other's
deficiencies by writing, I mean by collaborating on single stories. And although
most of the stories were not very good, we did learn something by seeing how
other people would tackle the same subjects we were writing about.
You're uniquely qualified, I think, to comment on science fiction since you've
seen it from so many perspectives, as a fan, an author, an agent, an editor, and
so forth. You started the editing part of it when you were 19 years old, I
think. Is that right? I was lucky enough to fall into a job as a professional
magazine editor. When I was 19, I had asked. An editor I knew, because I'd been
trying to sell him stories without success, if he needed an assistant, and he
was kind enough not to laugh out loud. I didn't know at the time that not very
many science fiction magazine editors could afford assistance. But he mentioned
to me another publishing company that was expanding and suggested I get in touch
with them. So I did. It was popular publications, one of the biggest pulp houses
of the time. And they were expanding, and they gave me a job at $10 a week to
edit two professional science fiction magazines. $10 wasn't so bad. They hired
other editors for nothing at the same time. And most of the material you got
then was the pulp kind of stuff? It was mostly pulp, but it included a lot of
the writers who are the mainstays of the field now. I published a lot of Isaac
Asimov's stuff because we were close friends. A few of Robert A. Heinlein's
stories that his primary market, John Campbell, for one reason or other, didn't
want to print. And Henry Kuttner and A. G. Van Root and Cleve Cartmill and L.
Sprague DeCamp and most of the people who were writing at that time wound up in
my magazine, not always with their best stories. In fact, very often with their
worst stories, because I wasn't paying very much. I had a budget of about half a
cent a word. Yeah, and one of the other lines of work that you got into, I
remember, was as an advertising copywriter, which brings up to my mind the novel
The Space Merchants. Well, actually, The Space Merchants was sort of responsible
for it. When I was in the Army, in the Air Force, in World War II, I had some
spare time on my hands in Italy, and I decided to write a novel. And the most
interesting subject I could think of was the advertising industry. So I wrote a
whole novel about advertising. Very bad novel. After the war was over, I took it
out and looked at it and realized that it was pretty bad, and one of its great
defects was that I didn't know anything about advertising. So I went to the New
York Sunday Times and looked in the classified section, found a couple of people
advertising jobs in advertising, and applied and got one of them and spent about
three years as an advertising copywriter. And during that time, I looked over
this old novel again and realized that it had many more faults and ignorance.
And I burned it, and I had all the basic information about advertising and no
novel to put it in. So I thought of writing a science fiction novel, and it
turned out to be The Space Merchants. And Cyril Kornblith was a close friend of
mine. We'd collaborated before the war, before we both went into service. And
after I had written about a third of it, because a magazine editor wanted it in
a hurry, I asked Cyril if he wanted to help me with it, and he and I
collaborated on it from that on. What was your normal method of collaboration?
How did you work out your scenarios for the future? We didn't work them out in
very great detail ahead of time. Mostly what Cyril and I did was do, let's see,
we wrote seven novels and a number of short stories together. Generally
speaking, what we did after the war, after the space merchants, and we began
writing novels more often than short stories. Cyril would come out to my house
in Red Bank, New Jersey, where we kept the room for him with his own typewriter,
and we'd sit around and talk for a while and discuss general areas we were
interested in writing about, maybe some characters. And then we'd flip a coin,
and the loser would go up to the third floor and write the first four pages, and
he'd come down and say, you're on the other person and write the next four
pages. And if you do that about 25 or 30 times, you have the rough draft of a
complete novel. Everything got radically rewritten after that because the rough
draft was pretty rough, but structurally it was all there. Going back to the
space merchants, can you think of any more successful book in the history of
science fiction than that one? Oh, I'm sure there are a lot that are more
successful, depending on how you measure it. Certainly the H.G. Wells books were
far more successful and far more noteworthy in that they influenced far more
people. But the space merchants hasn't done badly. It's been translated into 45
or so languages and has been continuously in print for, let's see, it's now
almost 30 years. You mentioned that the movie rights had been sold and there was
some sort of a black market tape or something of a dramatic production of it.
Could you talk about that for just a moment? Well, when the book came out, the
Columbia Workshop of the Air made an adaptation of it. There was very little
television at that time, so it was a radio adaptation. It was a two-part radio
play, which someone illicitly dubbed, and tapes are available of it. I've heard
that. Unfortunately, they don't pay royalties. And about 10 or 15 years after
its publication, a British outfit bought the film rights. They bought them
outright, and they paid what struck me at the time as a fantastic amount of
money for them. In fact, they had to get the approval of the Bank of England to
transfer that much foreign exchange. But they never made it. I'm not quite sure
why. They not only didn't make it, they refused to listen to offers from other
producers who wanted to make it. And it just bogged down somewhere in the red
tape. I think there's a chance that it will be made in some form now because the
British outfit has loosened up and is willing to consider offers. But so far, I
know of no firm plan. Mm-hmm. There's one question I can never avoid asking an
author. I'm sure you get these all the time and I'm not sure how you respond to
them. But regarding the ending of the novel, did you intend for that to be
optimistic that we're going to get a new start on Venus, maybe perhaps construct
a better society? Was that the intention there, or did you leave it ambiguous? I
left it ambiguous partly because I wasn't feeling very positive at the time. The
novel was written in 1952 and thereabouts, which was a pretty grimy period in
the history of this country. It was the McCarthy years and the Cold War years,
and things did not look too... They didn't look even as good as they do now, as
a matter of fact. So I wasn't feeling optimistic. I didn't mean to foreclose the
possibility of a happy ending. Actually, the novel had two endings. There was a
different ending in the magazine version, more upbeat, but less organically
related to the rest of the novel. It was put in at the insistence of the
magazine editor. Mm-hmm. Many readers, of course, have noticed a very strong
social element in your work. You have much to say about United States society
and culture and so forth, and I believe you've even been involved in politics.
Have you seen yourself in the role of a preacher or moralist with warnings and
science fiction as sort of a pulpit, maybe, or a soapbox sort of a thing to
satirize with? Oh, sure. I think that every writer who really has any interest
in what he's doing feels that he has something to say. There's a remark, I don't
remember the source of it, that the proper title of every book is really How to
Be More Like Me. And I think that's something. I think that writers are
preachers and educators and polemicists and propagandists. It isn't always
political, and it isn't always overt, but if it isn't there, the novel doesn't
say anything. My own interests have been fairly heavily social and political
most of my life. I was active, as you mentioned, in a lot of political things at
one time or another. I even wrote a book called Practical Politics, which is
sort of a how-to-do-it manual of how to make the political apparatus work for
whatever cause is interesting. But I do not go out of my way to preach. It just,
I guess, colors everything I say because a lot of myself, and as of every other
writer I know, goes into what I'm writing. Do you think that science fiction has
peculiar qualifications to act as a vehicle for social comment? I think science
fiction has special qualifications to act as a vehicle for discussing anything
that affects the human being. It's a way of looking at the human race from
outside, objectively. It's a way of, it's a sort of game-playing mechanism for
seeing what would happen to human beings under conditions that haven't occurred
yet but are very possible. And I think that that's probably one of the strongest
factors accounting for the continual growth and interest in science fiction that
seems to have been going on as long as I've been alive. Okay. In some of your
recent works, say, Jam and Man Plus, you describe some bad political systems, I
think, where there's a lot of deception, selfish motives, war. I think even in
Jam, there was annihilation of the earth. Does that concentration on the bad
aspects of society come from your view of the world? No, I'm really Pollyanna.
I'm a great optimist about the world. I think that we're in for some terrible
times, and I don't think that most of us will enjoy much of what happens in the
next few years. But I think in the long run, the human race will straighten
itself out and learn to be able to live better with each other. But as far as
writing a novel is concerned, it's not too interesting to write about a utopia.
I mean, what are you going to say about a bunch of people who walk around in
togas and eat whole wheat bread and never have any bad thoughts? It's much more
interesting to paint the disasters that may occur as a sort of... I think it's
Kingsley Amos who calls that kind of science fiction cautionary literature. It's
not saying what will happen. It's just warning what might happen if we don't
watch out. Okay, I'd like to ask the same question about Jam that I did about
space merchants. The ending of it. I took it as hopeful, the part human, part
alien society, which you envision at the end of the book. I took that as
hopeful. Would I be misreading it? No, I think that it's hopeful. I think that
what I was trying to say in Jam was perhaps a little more overt preaching than I
usually intend. And I'm not sure that it came across the way I intended it to.
But the subtitle of Jam is The Making of a Utopia. And what I was trying to say
in the novel is that you can't really plan a utopia. You cannot construct a
society that will make everybody happy and productive and glad to be alive.
Because the happiness, satisfaction, productivity are not a state. They're a
process. And no rigid system can survive giving people maximum opportunities to
realize their potential without being flexible and changeable. Okay, and then in
Man Plus, what fascinated me about that book was your examination, the way you
did it. You examined machine intelligence. Do you think that's going to be
possible? The computers that you envision there are linking up and working to
survive? And sort of taking off? I think it's an undecided question. I'm not
sure which... It's a 50-50 chance, in my opinion, whether machine intelligence
can ever develop these sort of independent, self-defining goals that human
beings can't. But I don't think it's impossible. It's just that machines have
not yet got that smart. What I'm pretty sure of is that machines right now are
doing things that 50 years ago one would have described as showing human
intelligence. They solve problems very well. They even do creative things like
composing music in any style you like, or writing poetry. It's true that the
music and the poetry aren't very good, but most human-generated music and poetry
is not very good either. And I think that maybe better programs can be written
for machines and they can be more creative. But I think when that happens,
people will simply redefine that activity as no longer a symptom of
intelligence. Okay, the cyborg that you mentioned in that book, too, do you
think man will be partners with machine in that sort of way, too? I think it's
quite possible. I didn't make up the cyborg. The term and the concept was
invented by two Air Force or NASA, I've forgotten which researchers, in 1958 or
thereabouts. And it's been used widely in a lot of places, but I didn't make it
up. I think that we already see cyborgs in the sense that a lot of people have
mechanical parts keeping them alive, pacemakers and artificial plastic veins and
arteries and so on, not to mention things like glass eyes and prosthetic limbs
and false teeth and so on. And I think we also see a sort of intellectual
symbiotic like the cyborg in the link-up between human beings and computers.
Computers do not solve problems, do not make up problems and solve them, but
they make it possible for human beings to do that sort of thing in a fraction of
the time it used to take them. Therefore, they make the human beings effectively
more intelligent than they were. Okay, that leads me up to Gateway, which is one
of my favorite books. I think you've also written or said that it's one of your
favorite novels. It's the novel that I cared most about. I'm not entirely
pleased with anything I've written, and I'm very displeased with a lot of what
I've written. But Gateway comes as close to being the way I would like it to be
as any novel I've ever written. Now, I think I noticed this. I'm sure many
readers did, too. In fact, you've commented on it. There's a departure in style,
I think, from your other work. What were the influences that both caused the
idea of the book, perhaps, and also the different kind of style you used in it?
Well, one of the big things in Gateway was that I was under no pressure from
anyone but myself to do it the way I thought it should be done. I had my
publisher at that time, my principal publisher, was a man named Ian Valentine,
who offered me a contract with a substantial advance to write a novel without
saying what the novel was going to be and without imposing any deadline on when
I had to deliver it. So I didn't have to discuss it with an editor ahead of time
or write an outline and limit myself and the opportunities I could take. And I
didn't have the pressure of getting it delivered at a specific date to make me
rush it through. And actually, it took me, I think, six years from the time I
signed the contract until I delivered it. And I had been mulling it over for
several years before that. All in all, I think the book was something like ten
years in the gestation. And also, it's not possible for a writer to produce at
the same level all the time. I don't know why. There are times when I write
better than others. I can't relate them to any outside influence or to my
resolution to do well or anything like that. I just know that sometimes it comes
out better than other times. And Gateway, I think, is one of the times that it
came out very well. I wish I could say the same of all of my books. Did you say
the New Wave was an influence on the way you wrote that book, the so-called New
Wave in science fiction? New Wave was an attempt, I guess, 15 years ago or more,
of a number of writers to break away from the traditional kinds of science
fiction. In fact, most of them didn't want to call it science fiction anymore.
They wanted to call it speculative fiction or call it nothing at all. And they
were interested primarily in writing about inner space rather than outer space
and secondarily, a lot of them in things like the drug culture and rock music
and so on. But in the rather bitter internal struggle that went on in science
fiction, a lot of people taking sides one way or the other. I think everyone was
deeply affected. And the New Wave, if nothing else, taught a bunch of old
dinosaurs like Azimov and Heinlein and me, that there were non-traditional ways
of constructing a novel. You see, most of us had grown up when science fiction
was in the pulp magazines and most of it was written according to some variant
of a pulp formula. Well, it turned out that wasn't necessary. And I think the
New Wave is responsible for teaching us that. When you were writing Gateway,
when you conceived of the idea during that gestation period, did you intend for
there to be a sequel to it at that time? No, I did not intend for there to be a
sequel to it until it was published and people began telling me I ought to write
a sequel. That's what I was interested in. In other words, were these fans, you
responded to fan desires in that respect? Largely to fan desires and also to my
publisher who sat on me and insisted. I wasn't too hard to convince, but I did
not have any such plans. I know that Gateway leaves a lot of questions
unanswered and suggests a lot of things that are not made explicit in the novel.
And I did all that on purpose, but not for the sake of preparing the way for a
sequel, but just because I think that's a characteristic of a lot of good
science fiction. When you finish the story, you think of things that let you
write your own stories after it. I mean, that's the sort of thing that Arthur
Clarke does very well. And I try to do it whenever I can. And it just turned out
that there was a lot of public pressure to write a sequel. There's also been
public pressure to write another sequel, and I'm just about to sign a contract
to do that, but I swear I had no such intention when I finished Beyond the Blue
Event Horizon. That's what I was going to ask you. There were still some
questions about the Heechi that were open for exploration, and I wondered if
you'd considered another novel about them. I considered it, and just a few weeks
ago, I yielded the pressure from my publisher and said I would sign a contract
for another book. I don't plan to go on beyond that. I don't want to do Habit
Kistola meet the Heechi, or Habit and the Heechi go to Hawaii, or whatever.
That's going to be the end of it as far as I'm concerned, but I will write one
more. So many authors are doing trilogies these days. I thought that maybe you'd
started out with that idea way back. No, not me. A lot of them do, and I kind of
resent it because I think mostly it's unfair to the reader to give them part of
a story. I don't think that's true of either Gateway or Beyond the Blue. I think
they stand up by themselves. Okay, I'd like to switch for just a few minutes to
some questions about your time as an editor. I think it was during the 60s you
served as the editor of Galaxy and some of its satellite publications. And
probably the best science fiction of a decade went through you in that magazine,
the best magazine of science fiction. I was interested in how much influence you
had on the authors, you know, your method of encouraging, coaxing, how you
worked with them to get the material you did. What's different with different
authors, the thing that I know best about how to be an editor is that you cannot
have a general policy and apply it to everybody and hope it will work in every
case because writers are very diverse human beings. Some of them respond to long
letters of criticism and suggestions and patting on the back or beating over the
head and some of them do not want any outside influence at all. One of my
favorite writers told me early in our relationship that he was willing to have
me buy some stories and reject others but he didn't want to hear why. If I sent
it back, just send it back and say no and not tell him what I didn't like about
it because that upset him. Other writers wanted to know in great detail not only
what I didn't like but what I did like. And also, there are some writers who are
very responsive to money and some to whom money means nothing at all. Not that
they are immune to it but they don't want to think in those terms. And there are
some writers who respond to a lot of personal attention and some who really want
to be left alone. And I had to find out something about each writer to find out
the best way to deal with them. I can't say I was always successful either.
There are a number of writers that I think I should have been able to get more
good material from and didn't. And I just missed the combination in those cases.
An editor in that position, the kind of position you had, I would assume that a
lot of stories get published because of the editor's help and whatever kinds of
encouragement he gives that would not have been published otherwise. Quite a
few. Yeah, especially quite a few stories come to be written because an editor
says, listen, you've got a notion here that you are throwing away and you really
should expand it. John Campbell was superb at that sort of thing. Some of the
best stories he published were the result of his telling a writer that he had an
idea that he didn't realize he had and then getting the writer to write it. And
I tried to do that as much as I could too. But writers do not always know where
their ideas come from and do not always know how to deal with outside
suggestions. There's one very good writer who always wanted comments and
suggestions who I finally decided I shouldn't ever give any to because the only
thing he ever did was not to rewrite a story the way I suggested it but to throw
it away and write a whole new one. I was never able to get him to rewrite a line
and as a result there are probably 10 or 15 stories of his that will never be
published because he just threw them away. Hmm. When you I think IF was one of
the magazines you worked with when you were with Galaxy. Galaxy and IF and a
couple of others. Yeah. Did you get Larry Niven's first story in that IF
magazine? Mm-hmm. I published his first story which is a very short one and for
which he got a very short paycheck and his next one was a little longer and he
got a little more and the next one was quite a lot longer and he got quite a lot
more and Larry said that if it hadn't been for those three events in that order
he could not have gone on being a writer. So I take some pride in the fact that
I was instrumental in making it possible for him to devote his time to writing.
Were those first stories were they the hard science fiction type that he's noted
for? Yes. Larry has always been best at writing hard science fiction. One or two
of them I suggested to him but mostly it was just a matter of encouraging him to
do his own thing. The neutron star of the first Hugo he won was a story I
suggested to him. Okay. Also you worked at Bannam Books for a while. Do I
remember correctly that you were the one who published Delaney's Dahlgren? Yes
indeed. After every other publisher in America had turned it down or at least
after the half dozen or dozen most likely prospects had turned it down. I wanted
to kind of ask about that. What's your first impression of that was? You had no
hesitation in publishing that? Were there any... No I had a great deal of
hesitation. Dahlgren in manuscript was just formidable. It ran to over a
thousand pages of typescript and if you've ever... Anyone who's ever looked at
the book knows that it's a complicated and difficult book but it was also the
work of a writer who I consider to be one of the most talented in the field and
a writer who considered it to be his best work. So all my misgivings were
overcome by the fact that I had that much trust in Delaney. I didn't really
think it would do as well as it did. I thought it might get through a printing
of a hundred thousand copies and then rest for a while and then word of mouth
would make it a bigger book but actually it took off immediately. I don't know
how many copies it sold. It's over half a million and maybe a million. Was there
much revision you suggested for that book or was it pretty much... I didn't ask
them to do a thing to it. My big concern was to make sure that the typesetters
said it exactly the way he wrote it. Yeah. Do you think in those kinds of
positions that you had and maybe other editors who worked a few years in the
past, can an editor today have as much influence as he could in the past, say
you or John Campbell or somebody? I don't think so. One of the reasons I gave up
editing was that it seemed to me to have become less a matter of personal work
by one editor and more and more of a committee matter. There are editors who are
very good at what they're doing and do some things far better than I ever could.
But it's a different kind of thing. It's no longer a one-man operation or a one
-woman operation. It's now big business. When I began writing science fiction,
even a magazine like Astounding, which was the preeminent thing in the field,
was paying to all writers combined over the course of a year probably less than
$10,000. And now any novel can expect to get that much. Some of them get ten
times that much or even a hundred times that much. So it's got to be quite big
business. Okay, let me make another little switch here to your work as an agent.
I was interested in the innovation or the way that you paid your authors. Could
you explain how that worked? Well, when I was an agent, it occurred to me that a
lot of my writers were, they needed their checks to live on. And consequently,
they were trying to write stories that they thought someone would buy quickly
and pay for very well rather than the things that I thought they were really
good at. So I made an arrangement with a number of them, I think about 20 or 25
at the top, that they could write anything they wanted to and I would advance
them a certain amount per word as soon as I got the manuscript I would wait for
it to sell. And as a result, I think that a lot of them were writing pretty well
at that time. Cyril Karnbluth was one of them, Damon Knight was one of them, and
Robert Checkley and a few others and I think they were just about doing their
best work under those conditions. However, it turned out to be more of a
financial burden than I could bear and consequently I managed to lose about $30
,000 as an agent.
I would imagine though that you kept many authors going and we have many books
and stories today because of that method. I think so. I mean, I'm willing to
take credit for that because I believe it to be so. And I do think that it's a
very good way to operate, but as far as I know, no other agent has ever done it.
And I'm sure I know why, because it does tend to be a big drain on capital and
if you don't have a lot of capital, it can't be done. I was sort of fascinated
to read the publishing history the first time it was published, the book Mission
of Gravity by Hal Clement. If I understand right, you were the agent that sold
the book to Campbell? Yeah, well, Hal Clement had written the book all by
himself. He was one of the writers who functioned best when left alone. and all
by himself had submitted it to a prize novel contest
run by one of the semi-pro publishers of the time and it got stuck there and
couldn't get loose of it. So my first big problem was to get it away from them,
which took quite a lot of effort. Second problem was that when I submitted it to
Campbell, who was obviously the right person to publish it, he sent it back. He
said, pretty good stuff that you should know, Fred, that there's a difference
between a novel that reads well as a book and a novel that reads well as a
serial and this one just does not break as a serial. So I knew he was wrong and
I knew I couldn't argue him out of it and so I looked at the manuscript which
was, I think, 270 pages long or something like that and I counted up to page 90
and drew a line under a paragraph there and counted up to page 180 and drew a
line under a paragraph there and had my secretary retype a couple of pages on
each side of each line saying at the bottom of the first part end of part one
and the beginning of the second part beginning of part two and I let it sit for
a couple weeks and I sent it back to John and he bought it. I didn't tell him
that it had been rewritten which it hadn't I just sent it back and he bought it
and published it and it turned out to be very nearly the most popular serial
analog ever astounding or analog whatever it was at the time ever run. One of
the things that I'm convinced of about being an agent is that you shouldn't let
editors make mistakes. If they reject something they really should buy you
should find some way of getting them to reverse themselves. Well that was a that
might have been a close call. Do you think that book would have had trouble
being published? Not a bit. It certainly would have been published somewhere
else but the right place for it I thought was in astounding because it was the
prestige magazine at the time. Okay. I believe I read also were you were you
Isaac Asimov's agent at one time? Yes I was. And you what sort of helped him
from the transition from the magazines to book publication? Yeah. I persuaded
him to think in terms of writing books and it wasn't easy because Isaac was
quite convinced that he wasn't a book writer and the particular manuscript that
I wanted to sell as a book he didn't like very much. He'd written it for a
magazine as a short novel and they had turned it down very ungraciously and he'd
lost confidence in it. It came out in book form as Pebble in the Sky. So I
practically had to have a fist fight with him to get the manuscript away from
him. And I did suggest to him too that he might consider writing non-fiction as
well as fiction since there was a much more reliable market at that time and I
guess still is for non-fiction. Although by the time he actually began taking
that advice I had stopped being an agent. Okay. These questions I've been asking
about as an agent as an editor and so forth just to end it could I ask you are
there any particular discoveries or influences that you're particularly proud of
say things that you've had some influence in that you remember with a certain
kind of fondness or so forth? Most of the things we've talked about I remember
with some fondness you've been very kind in only mentioning the things that I'm
rather pleased about. I also had a great many failures in places where I know I
should have done better and was not witty enough to perceive it at the time. But
as an agent I think I did manage to get a number of writers on a track that
would have taken a little more time to discover by themselves and as an editor I
feel that I did give a good many writers either their first publication or their
most visible publication and I take pleasure in that. Outside of that I think
it's pure drudgery. The only really pleasurable thing about it is finding
something and printing it and giving it to an audience that might otherwise
either never have existed or never have got into print.
Okay. Very few people probably would be as qualified to answer this kind of the
next question I have than you would be. Regarding the publishing and the
marketing of science fiction we've talked to some authors particularly Norman
Spinrad who think that the publishing industry is set up to keep science fiction
separate that it should remain separate and that perhaps keeps it sort of second
class in a lot of readers' eyes where it should be allowed to join the
mainstream and so forth. Is the publishing industry responsible for that kind of
thing or do you think science fiction should be brought into the so-called
mainstream of literature? Well the publishing industry is responsible for that
and in some ways it's a bad thing. A lot of people in this world like to read
books but are prejudiced against anything that has the word science fiction on
it. As I think it's I've forgotten the person who wrote the poem there's a
little poem about it which says something like if it's science fiction I don't
like it and if I like it it can't possibly be science fiction because there are
a great many science fiction novels that everybody loves they just don't admit
they're science fiction the Great New World in 1984
but I don't mind that I'm perfectly willing to have the word science fiction on
the cover of any book I write it's only a sort of geographical designation it's
the name they put on the shelves where the books appear that the people who like
to read my books are going to go and it does not describe the field it's not a
very good name but it's a sort of it's like a Roman standard it's a rallying
point it's where you find a cluster of things that you like Norman Spinrad I
know feels very badly about it and so does Harlan Ellison and so do several
others but I don't share their particular hangups Okay and in respect to that
business about science fiction being separate I think you said the awards to
this effect that science fiction is a special taste I suppose that means there's
a special sort of person that would appreciate it or tend to read it Well I
think that science fiction makes more demands on the reader than most kinds of
writing you have to be willing to stretch your imagination you have to be
willing to follow what is sometimes a pretty complex argument and it's helpful
if you know something about the real world not just how to go to the A&P but
what the basic constraints of physical science are and what the societies how
societies work and not too many people are willing to put in that much effort
but there's an awful lot of science which requires no effort at all and that's
often the kinds that are most popular Star Trek for example requires very little
effort from anybody and of course has been very successful You also have a
reputation as a futurist wouldn't you think that science fiction would have a
great value say for the majority of the reading public in preparing people for
the future and so forth Oh I think so I think anybody who reads science fiction
is very likely to be overcome by future shock the well when the atomic bomb fell
on Hiroshima there were only about 10,000 people in the world who understood
what had happened about 500 nuclear physicists and the rest were all science
fiction fans and I think the same has been true about the space program and
about many of the social developments of the last 20 or 30 years and I think
that if you read enough science fiction you begin to get a spectrum of the
possible futures that lie ahead for all of us and I think it's quite useful in
the sense that it lets you make decisions now about which ones of them you would
like to avoid or which ones you would like to avert and it helps you find ways
of taking actions now that will encourage the good ones and discourage the bad
ones but it's not just that I think science fiction also has a good deal of
entertainment of what is to me an extremely pleasurable kind to offer all right
you've written a great deal in your memoirs the way the future was really about
the history of science fiction from your perspective you know from your vantage
point is science fiction today very different than it was back in the 30s and so
forth when you got so involved with it have there been really huge changes
science fiction today is not only very different from what it was in the 30s
it's very different from other kinds of science fiction today one of the things
that attracts me to science fiction is that there are so many different kinds of
it there are books like the one I mentioned before Dahlgren which are not a bit
like the ones by Doc Smith the Skylark stories of Lensman stories which are not
a bit like the ones by Ursula Le Guin which are not a bit like the ones by Larry
Niven for example and I think that science fiction is characterized by variety
there are very few general statements you can make about science fiction it
isn't fiction about science it isn't fiction about the future it isn't fiction
about space travel it's fiction which has to do more than anything else with
change somebody asked Arthur Clarke once why he wrote science fiction and he
said something like because it's the only literature that concerns itself with
reality and if you take that reality to be the reality of change the big one
that confronts us all then science fiction is it the rest of the literature
deals with what is or what has been science fiction deals with change okay just
a second I have to check with David on the time we have left on the tape here um